DEVELOPMENT.md, before:

# Development Guide

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 20+
- npm
- Git
- Docker (via [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) or [OrbStack](https://orbstack.dev/)) — for local PostgreSQL
- [Railway CLI](https://docs.railway.com/guides/cli) (for deployment monitoring)

## Local Setup

### 1. Clone and Install

```bash
git clone git@github.com:lucaswall/food-scanner.git
cd food-scanner
npm install
```

### 2. Start Database

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

This starts a local PostgreSQL instance on port 5432. To stop it:

```bash
docker compose down        # Stop (data persisted)
docker compose down -v     # Stop and delete all data
```

### 3. Environment Variables

Create `.env.local`:

```bash
# Database
DATABASE_URL=postgresql://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/food_scanner

# Session (iron-session password, min 32 characters)
# Generate with: openssl rand -base64 32
SESSION_SECRET=at-least-32-characters-long-random-string

# App URL (must match OAuth redirect URIs)
APP_URL=http://localhost:3000

# Auth
ALLOWED_EMAIL=wall.lucas@gmail.com

# Google OAuth (see OAuth Setup for Local Development section below)
GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID=your-google-client-id
GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET=your-google-client-secret

# Fitbit OAuth (see OAuth Setup for Local Development section below)
FITBIT_CLIENT_ID=your-fitbit-client-id
FITBIT_CLIENT_SECRET=your-fitbit-client-secret

# Anthropic (see Anthropic API Setup section below)
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your-anthropic-api-key

# Logging (optional, defaults to debug in development)
LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

Google and Fitbit OAuth credentials are required for the auth flow. See the **OAuth Setup for Local Development** section below. Anthropic API key is required for food analysis — see the **Anthropic API Setup** section below.

> **Note:** Migrations run automatically when you start the dev server (`npm run dev`).

### 4. Run Development Server

```bash
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### 5. Verify

```bash
curl http://localhost:3000/api/health
```

Should return `{ "success": true, "data": { "status": "ok" }, "timestamp": ... }`.

---

## Available Commands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start dev server with hot reload |
| `npm run build` | Production build |
| `npm start` | Start production server |
| `npm run lint` | Run ESLint |
| `npm run typecheck` | Run TypeScript type checking |
| `npm test` | Run tests |
| `docker compose up -d` | Start local PostgreSQL |
| `docker compose down` | Stop local PostgreSQL |
| `npx drizzle-kit generate` | Generate migration from schema changes |
| `npx drizzle-kit studio` | Open Drizzle Studio (DB browser) |

---

## Project Structure

See [CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md) for the full project structure breakdown.

Key directories:
- `src/app/` — Next.js App Router pages and API routes
- `src/components/` — React components
- `src/lib/` — Shared utilities (session, API clients)
- `src/types/` — TypeScript type definitions

---

## Code Style

### TypeScript
- **Strict mode** is enabled — no implicit `any`, no unused locals/params
- Use `@/` path alias for imports: `import { getSession } from '@/lib/session'`
- Build must pass with **zero warnings**

### Formatting
- Tailwind CSS for styling (no custom CSS unless necessary)
- shadcn/ui for UI components
- Mobile-first responsive design

### Commit Messages

Format: `<type>: <summary>`

| Type | When |
|------|------|
| `feat` | New feature |
| `fix` | Bug fix |
| `refactor` | Code restructuring |
| `chore` | Build, config, dependencies |
| `docs` | Documentation |
| `test` | Tests |

Examples:
- `feat: add Google OAuth login flow`
- `fix: handle expired Fitbit tokens gracefully`
- `chore: update Next.js to 15.1`

---

## Development Status

This project is in **active development**. Breaking changes are expected and acceptable.

- No backward compatibility required
- Delete unused code immediately
- No deprecation warnings needed
- When changing APIs/configs, update ALL references

---

## Linear Integration

Issues are tracked in Linear under the "Food Scanner" team with FOO-xxx prefix.

**State flow:** Backlog → Todo → In Progress → Review → Merge → Done

To authenticate Linear MCP, use the `/mcp` command in Claude Code.

---

## Claude Code Workflow

This project uses Claude Code with custom agents and skills for development:

### Agents
- **verifier** — Runs tests and build validation (use proactively)
- **commit-bot** — Creates commits (only when asked)
- **pr-creator** — Full PR workflow (only when asked)
- **bug-hunter** — Reviews code for bugs (use proactively before commits)

### Skills (invoke with `/skill-name`)
- `/plan-todo FOO-123` — Plan implementation of a backlog issue
- `/plan-inline <description>` — Plan from a direct description
- `/plan-implement` — Execute the current plan
- `/plan-review-implementation` — Review completed implementation
- `/plan-fix <bug>` — Investigate and plan a bug fix
- `/investigate <issue>` — Read-only investigation
- `/code-audit` — Full codebase audit
- `/add-to-backlog <items>` — Add issues to Linear backlog

### Typical Workflow
1. `/plan-todo FOO-123` or `/plan-inline <feature>` — Create plan
2. `/plan-implement` — Execute the plan with TDD
3. `/plan-review-implementation` — Review the implementation
4. Ask for commit and PR when ready

---

## Railway CLI Setup

The Railway CLI is used to monitor deployments and read logs. See [README.md](README.md) for full deployment instructions.

```bash
# Install Railway CLI (macOS)
brew install railway

# Login
railway login

# Link to the food-scanner project (from this directory)
railway link

# Useful commands
railway logs              # Stream deploy logs
railway logs --build      # Stream build logs
railway variables          # List environment variables
railway domain             # Show or generate public URL
```

The CLI link is stored globally at `~/.railway/config.json`, not in the project directory.

---

## OAuth Setup for Local Development

Follow the [OAuth Setup section in README.md](README.md#oauth-setup) to create Google and Fitbit OAuth credentials. Then add the localhost redirect URIs to each provider:

- **Google Cloud Console** → Your OAuth client → Authorized redirect URIs → add:
  `http://localhost:3000/api/auth/google/callback`
- **Fitbit Developer** → Your app → Redirect URIs → add:
  `http://localhost:3000/api/auth/fitbit/callback`

Copy the Client ID and Client Secret values into your `.env.local` file.

---

## Anthropic API Setup

The Anthropic API is used for AI-powered food analysis via Claude Sonnet.

1. Go to [console.anthropic.com](https://console.anthropic.com)
2. Create an account or sign in
3. Navigate to **API Keys** in the sidebar
4. Click **Create Key** and give it a name (e.g., "food-scanner-dev")
5. Copy the API key immediately (it won't be shown again)
6. Add the key to your `.env.local`:
   ```bash
   ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-api03-...
   ```

**Permissions:** The API key needs standard API access. No special scopes or permissions are required.

**Costs:** Claude Sonnet is used for food analysis. Typical usage (1-3 analyses per day) costs approximately $0.02/day or ~$0.60/month. See [Anthropic pricing](https://www.anthropic.com/pricing) for current rates.

Commit message:

docs: add .env.sample and improve local setup instructions
Add .env.sample with all required variables, sensible local defaults, and
inline comments. Update DEVELOPMENT.md to recommend pulling variables from
Railway first (via railway CLI), then overriding the 3 local-specific vars
(DATABASE_URL, APP_URL, LOG_LEVEL) instead of typing everything manually.

DEVELOPMENT.md, after:

# Development Guide

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 20+
- npm
- Git
- Docker (via [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) or [OrbStack](https://orbstack.dev/)) — for local PostgreSQL
- [Railway CLI](https://docs.railway.com/guides/cli) (for deployment monitoring)

## Local Setup

### 1. Clone and Install

```bash
git clone git@github.com:lucaswall/food-scanner.git
cd food-scanner
npm install
```

### 2. Start Database

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

This starts a local PostgreSQL instance on port 5432. To stop it:

```bash
docker compose down        # Stop (data persisted)
docker compose down -v     # Stop and delete all data
```

### 3. Environment Variables

The fastest way to set up your `.env.local` is to pull variables from Railway and override the ones that differ locally.

**Option A: Pull from Railway (recommended)**

```bash
# Requires Railway CLI linked to the project (see Railway CLI Setup below)
railway variables --kv > .env.local
```

Then edit `.env.local` and override these values for local development:

| Variable | Change to | Why |
|----------|-----------|-----|
| `DATABASE_URL` | `postgresql://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/food_scanner` | Use local Docker Postgres instead of Railway Postgres |
| `APP_URL` | `http://localhost:3000` | Local dev server, not production domain |
| `LOG_LEVEL` | `debug` (optional) | More verbose logging during development |

Remove any Railway-internal variables (e.g., `RAILWAY_*`, `PORT`) — they're not needed locally.

**Option B: Start from sample file**

```bash
cp .env.sample .env.local
```

Then fill in the secrets. See `.env.sample` for all required variables with comments. You'll need to provide:
- `SESSION_SECRET` — generate with `openssl rand -base64 32`
- `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID` / `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET` — see **OAuth Setup for Local Development** below
- `FITBIT_CLIENT_ID` / `FITBIT_CLIENT_SECRET` — see **OAuth Setup for Local Development** below
- `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` — see **Anthropic API Setup** below

> **Note:** Migrations run automatically when you start the dev server (`npm run dev`).

### 4. Run Development Server

```bash
npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).

### 5. Verify

```bash
curl http://localhost:3000/api/health
```

Should return `{ "success": true, "data": { "status": "ok" }, "timestamp": ... }`.

---

## Available Commands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start dev server with hot reload |
| `npm run build` | Production build |
| `npm start` | Start production server |
| `npm run lint` | Run ESLint |
| `npm run typecheck` | Run TypeScript type checking |
| `npm test` | Run tests |
| `docker compose up -d` | Start local PostgreSQL |
| `docker compose down` | Stop local PostgreSQL |
| `npx drizzle-kit generate` | Generate migration from schema changes |
| `npx drizzle-kit studio` | Open Drizzle Studio (DB browser) |

---

## Project Structure

See [CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md) for the full project structure breakdown.

Key directories:
- `src/app/` — Next.js App Router pages and API routes
- `src/components/` — React components
- `src/lib/` — Shared utilities (session, API clients)
- `src/types/` — TypeScript type definitions

---

## Code Style

### TypeScript
- **Strict mode** is enabled — no implicit `any`, no unused locals/params
- Use `@/` path alias for imports: `import { getSession } from '@/lib/session'`
- Build must pass with **zero warnings**

### Formatting
- Tailwind CSS for styling (no custom CSS unless necessary)
- shadcn/ui for UI components
- Mobile-first responsive design

### Commit Messages

Format: `<type>: <summary>`

| Type | When |
|------|------|
| `feat` | New feature |
| `fix` | Bug fix |
| `refactor` | Code restructuring |
| `chore` | Build, config, dependencies |
| `docs` | Documentation |
| `test` | Tests |

Examples:
- `feat: add Google OAuth login flow`
- `fix: handle expired Fitbit tokens gracefully`
- `chore: update Next.js to 15.1`

---

## Development Status

This project is in **active development**. Breaking changes are expected and acceptable.

- No backward compatibility required
- Delete unused code immediately
- No deprecation warnings needed
- When changing APIs/configs, update ALL references

---

## Linear Integration

Issues are tracked in Linear under the "Food Scanner" team with FOO-xxx prefix.

**State flow:** Backlog → Todo → In Progress → Review → Merge → Done

To authenticate Linear MCP, use the `/mcp` command in Claude Code.

---

## Claude Code Workflow

This project uses Claude Code with custom agents and skills for development:

### Agents
- **verifier** — Runs tests and build validation (use proactively)
- **commit-bot** — Creates commits (only when asked)
- **pr-creator** — Full PR workflow (only when asked)
- **bug-hunter** — Reviews code for bugs (use proactively before commits)

### Skills (invoke with `/skill-name`)
- `/plan-todo FOO-123` — Plan implementation of a backlog issue
- `/plan-inline <description>` — Plan from a direct description
- `/plan-implement` — Execute the current plan
- `/plan-review-implementation` — Review completed implementation
- `/plan-fix <bug>` — Investigate and plan a bug fix
- `/investigate <issue>` — Read-only investigation
- `/code-audit` — Full codebase audit
- `/add-to-backlog <items>` — Add issues to Linear backlog

### Typical Workflow
1. `/plan-todo FOO-123` or `/plan-inline <feature>` — Create plan
2. `/plan-implement` — Execute the plan with TDD
3. `/plan-review-implementation` — Review the implementation
4. Ask for commit and PR when ready

---

## Railway CLI Setup

The Railway CLI is used to monitor deployments and read logs. See [README.md](README.md) for full deployment instructions.

```bash
# Install Railway CLI (macOS)
brew install railway

# Login
railway login

# Link to the food-scanner project (from this directory)
railway link

# Useful commands
railway logs              # Stream deploy logs
railway logs --build      # Stream build logs
railway variables          # List environment variables
railway domain             # Show or generate public URL
```

The CLI link is stored globally at `~/.railway/config.json`, not in the project directory.

---

## OAuth Setup for Local Development

Follow the [OAuth Setup section in README.md](README.md#oauth-setup) to create Google and Fitbit OAuth credentials. Then add the localhost redirect URIs to each provider:

- **Google Cloud Console** → Your OAuth client → Authorized redirect URIs → add:
  `http://localhost:3000/api/auth/google/callback`
- **Fitbit Developer** → Your app → Redirect URIs → add:
  `http://localhost:3000/api/auth/fitbit/callback`

Copy the Client ID and Client Secret values into your `.env.local` file.

---

## Anthropic API Setup

The Anthropic API is used for AI-powered food analysis via Claude Sonnet.

1. Go to [console.anthropic.com](https://console.anthropic.com)
2. Create an account or sign in
3. Navigate to **API Keys** in the sidebar
4. Click **Create Key** and give it a name (e.g., "food-scanner-dev")
5. Copy the API key immediately (it won't be shown again)
6. Add the key to your `.env.local`:
   ```bash
   ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-api03-...
   ```

**Permissions:** The API key needs standard API access. No special scopes or permissions are required.

**Costs:** Claude Sonnet is used for food analysis. Typical usage (1-3 analyses per day) costs approximately $0.02/day or ~$0.60/month. See [Anthropic pricing](https://www.anthropic.com/pricing) for current rates.
